--- 
title: New address
layout: post
categories: ['en']
---
I haven't written anything here for a while now. It was partially caused by a little mess in my blogs. I had 2 blogs with addresses blog.drogomir.com (for Polish blog) and drogomir.com/blog (for English blog)... I didn't quite like addresses (hey? which one is in which language?) and keeping them in separate engines (typo and mephisto). Each time I wanted to start new post, I felt that I should change that situation right away. The problem is, I never had that much will to actually do something and after few minutes of checking solutions I usually stopped without any effects.

Finally I've merged my blogs and moved it to current address: "piotrsarnacki.com":http://piotrsarnacki.com.

The blog is "hosted on github":http://github.com/drogus/drogus.github.com wiht help of "jekyll":http://github.com/mojombo/jekyll. Jekyll is great so far. Its simplicity is impressive and I don't have to worry about any server related issues. Layout is borrowed from "Tom Presto-Werner's site":http://tom.preston-werner.com. It helped me start within a few minutes, but I will try to change it in a few days.

Although old RSS feed still should work, I recommend to use new one: "feeds.feedburner.com/piotrsarnacki":http://feeds.feedburner.com/piotrsarnacki. All the feeds available for this blog are: 

* "feeds.feedburner.com/piotrsarnacki":http://feeds.feedburner.com/piotrsarnacki - English content
* "feeds.feedburner.com/piotrsarnacki-pl":http://feeds.feedburner.com/piotrsarnacki-pl - Polish content (available on "piotrsarnacki.com/pl":http://piotrsarnacki.com/pl)
* "feeds.feedburner.com/piotrsarnacki-all":http://feeds.feedburner.com/piotrsarnacki-all - All posts

I deleted some of the posts and marked some "as deprecated":http://piotrsarnacki.com/2009/06/16/cucumber-and-celerity-testing-unobtrusive-javascript/. I try to not abandon that blog this time and post some new stuff.

On the side note. I have managed to be one of 20 students working on "Ruby Summer of Code":http://rubysoc.org projects. I will work in the team with "Bogdan Gaza":http://github.com/hurrycane on Rails 3 mountable apps and Rails admin panel (I will focus more on mountable apps part and Bogdan will work on rails admin panel). "Carl Lerche":http://github.com/carllerche and "Erik Michaels-Ober":http://github.com/sferik will be our primary mentors.

I will try to post progress updates on this blog. Stay tuned!
